Separating objects (#413)
the1lab/1lab: src/Cat/Diagram/Separator.lagda.md

---

<!--
```agda
open import Cat.Diagram.Coproduct.Copower
open import Cat.Diagram.Coproduct.Indexed
open import Cat.Instances.Shape.Terminal
open import Cat.Functor.FullSubcategory
open import Cat.Diagram.Colimit.Base
open import Cat.Diagram.Limit.Finite
open import Cat.Functor.Conservative
open import Cat.Diagram.Coequaliser
open import Cat.Functor.Properties
open import Cat.Diagram.Equaliser
open import Cat.Functor.Constant
open import Cat.Functor.Compose
open import Cat.Instances.Comma
open import Cat.Instances.Sets
open import Cat.Functor.Joint
open import Cat.Diagram.Zero
open import Cat.Functor.Base
open import Cat.Functor.Hom
open import Cat.Prelude

open import Data.Dec.Base

import Cat.Morphism.StrongEpi
import Cat.Reasoning
```
-->

```agda
module Cat.Diagram.Separator {o ℓ} (C : Precategory o ℓ) where
```

<!--
```agda
open Cat.Morphism.StrongEpi C
open Cat.Reasoning C
open _=>_
```
-->

<!--
  [TODO: Reed M, 21/01/2024] Write the page on concrete categories; link separators
  to representing objects for the faithful functors.
-->

# Separating objects

One of key property of $\Sets$ is that we can demonstrate the equality of

> 2 functions $f, g : A \to B$ by showing that they are equal pointwise.
> Categorically, this is equivalent to saying that we can determine the
> equality of 2 morphisms $A \to B$ in $\Sets$ solely by looking at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two functions $f, g : A \to B$ by showing that they are equal pointwise.
Categorically, this is equivalent to saying that we can determine the
equality of two morphisms $A \to B$ in $\Sets$ solely by looking at
```

global elements $\top \to A$. This is not the case for general categories
equipped with a terminal object: the [[category of groups]] has a terminal
object (the [[zero group]]), yet maps out of the zero group are
unique^[In other words, the zero group is a [[zero object]].]! In light of
this, we can generalize the role that $\top$ plays in $\Sets$ to obtain
the a notion of separating object:

:::{.definition #separating-object alias="separator"}
A **separating object** or **separator** is an object $S : \cC$ that lets
us determine equality of morphisms $f, g : \cC(A,B)$ solely by looking at

> the $S$-generalized elements of $A$. Expliclity, $S$ is a separator if:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the $S$-generalized elements of $A$. Explicity, $S$ is a separator if:
```

in place of separator.
:::

```agda
is-separator : Ob → Type _
is-separator s =
  ∀ {x y} {f g : Hom x y}
  → (∀ (e : Hom s x) → f ∘ e ≡ g ∘ e)
  → f ≡ g
```

Equivalently, an object $S$ is a separator if the hom functor $\cC(S,-)$
is [[faithful]]. A good way to view this condition is that it ensures
that the $S$-global elements functor to be somewhat well-behaved.

```agda
separator→faithful : ∀ {s} → is-separator s → is-faithful (Hom-from C s)
separator→faithful sep p = sep (happly p)

faithful→separator : ∀ {s} → is-faithful (Hom-from C s) → is-separator s
faithful→separator faithful p = faithful (ext p)
```

Intuitively, a separator $S$ gives us an internal version of function
extensionality, with pointwise equality replaced by $S$-wise equality.
We can make this formal by showing that a separator $S$ gives us an
[[identity system]] for morphisms in $\cC$.

```agda
separator-identity-system
  : ∀ {s x y}
  → is-separator s
  → is-identity-system {A = Hom x y}
      (λ f g → ∀ (e : Hom s x) → f ∘ e ≡ g ∘ e)
      (λ f e → refl)
separator-identity-system separate =
  set-identity-system (λ _ _ → hlevel 1) separate
```

> # Separating Families

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Separating families
```

Many categories lack a single separating object $S : \cC$, but do have a *family* of

> separating objects $S_i : I \to \cC$. The canonical is the category of presheaves:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
separating objects $S_i : I \to \cC$. The canonical example is the category of presheaves:
```

we cannot determine equality of natural transformations $\alpha, \beta : P \to Q$

> by looking at all maps $S \to P$ single $S$, but we *can* if we look at all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by looking at all maps $S \to P$ for a single $S$, but we *can* if we look at all
```

maps $\yo(A) \to P$! This leads us to the following notion:

:::{.definition #separating-family}
A **separating family** is a family of objects $S : I \to \cC$ such that:
- For every $f, g : \cC(A, B)$, if $f \circ e_i = g \circ e_i$ for every

>   $i : I$ and every $e_i : \cC(S_i,A)$, then $f = g$.

Reviewer: Single-item list?

:::

```agda
is-separating-family : ∀ {ℓi} {Idx : Type ℓi} → (Idx → Ob) → Type _
is-separating-family s =
  ∀ {x y} {f g : Hom x y}
  → (∀ {i} (eᵢ : Hom (s i) x) → f ∘ eᵢ ≡ g ∘ eᵢ)
  → f ≡ g
```

> Equivalently, an family $S_i : \cC$ of objects form a separating family if the hom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Equivalently, a family $S_i : \cC$ of objects is a separating family if the $\hom$
```

```agda
separating-family-identity-system
  : ∀ {ℓi} {Idx : Type ℓi} {sᵢ : Idx → Ob} {x y}
  → is-separating-family sᵢ
  → is-identity-system {A = Hom x y}
      (λ f g → ∀ {i} (eᵢ : Hom (sᵢ i) x) → f ∘ eᵢ ≡ g ∘ eᵢ)
      (λ f e → refl)
separating-family-identity-system separate =
  set-identity-system (λ _ _ → hlevel 1) separate
```

## Separators and copowers

Recall that if $\cC$ is [[copowered]], then we can construct an
approximation of any object $X : \cC$ by taking the copower $\cC(A,X) \otimes A$
for some $A : \cC$. Intuitively, this approximation works by adding a copy
of $A$ for every generalized element $\cC(A,X)$. In the category of sets,
$\Sets(\top, X) \otimes X$ is the coproduct of $X$-many copies of $\top$,
which is isomorphic to $X$.

Generalizing from $\Sets$, we can attempt to approximate any object
$X$ by taking the copower $\cC(S,X) \otimes S$, where $S$ is a separating
object. While we don't quite get an isomorphism $\cC(S,X) \otimes S \iso X$,
we can show that the universal map $\cC(S,X) \otimes X \to X$ out of the
copower is an epimorphism.

To see this, let $f, g : \cC(X, Y)$ such that

> $f \mathrm{match}(\lambda f. f) = f \circ \mathrm{match}(\lambda f. f)$;

Reviewer: Both sides of the equation are the same?

```agda
module _
  (copowers : (I : Set ℓ) → has-coproducts-indexed-by C ∣ I ∣)
  where
  open Copowers copowers

  separator→epi : ∀ {s x} → is-separator s → is-epic (⊗!.match (Hom s x) s λ f → f)
  separator→epi {s} {x} separate f g p = separate λ e →
    f ∘ e                                     ≡⟨ pushr (sym (⊗!.commute _ _)) ⟩
    (f ∘ (⊗!.match _ _ λ f → f)) ∘ ⊗!.ι _ _ e ≡⟨ p ⟩∘⟨refl ⟩
    (g ∘ (⊗!.match _ _ λ f → f)) ∘ ⊗!.ι _ _ e ≡⟨ pullr (⊗!.commute _ _) ⟩
    g ∘ e                                     ∎
```

Conversely, if the canonical map $\gamma_{X} : \cC(S,X) \otimes S \to X$
is an epimorphism for every $X$, then $S$ is a separator.

Let $f, g : \cC(X, Y)$ such that $f \circ e = g \circ e$ for every
$e : \cC(S, X)$. Note that $f \circ \gamma_{X} \circ \iota = g \circ \gamma_{X} \circ \iota$
by our hypothesis, so $f \circ \gamma_{X} = g \circ \gamma_{X}$. Moreover,
$\gamma_{X}$ is an epi, so $f = g$.

```agda
  epi→separator : ∀ {s} → (∀ {x} → is-epic (⊗!.match (Hom s x) s λ f → f)) → is-separator s
  epi→separator epic {f = f} {g = g} p =
    epic f g $ ⊗!.unique₂ _ _ λ e →
      sym (assoc _ _ _)
      ∙ p _
      ∙ assoc _ _ _
```

> A similar result hold for separating families, but with: a family $S_i : \cC$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A similar result holds for separating families, but with: a family $S_i : \cC$
```

    (f ∘ ∐!.match _ _ snd) ∘ ∐!.ι _ _ (i , eᵢ) ≡⟨ p ⟩∘⟨refl ⟩
    (g ∘ ∐!.match _ _ snd) ∘ ∐!.ι _ _ (i , eᵢ) ≡⟨ pullr (∐!.commute _ _) ⟩
    g ∘ eᵢ                                     ∎

  epi→separating-family Idx sᵢ epic {f = f} {g = g} p =
    epic f g $ ∐!.unique₂ _ _ λ (i , eᵢ) →
      sym (assoc _ _ _)
      ∙ p _
      ∙ assoc _ _ _
```
</details>

## Existence of separating families

If $\cC$ has [[equalisers]] and $\cC(S,-)$ is [[conservative]], then
$S$ is a separating family.

```agda
equalisers+conservative→separator
  : ∀ {s}
  → has-equalisers C
  → is-conservative (Hom-from C s)
  → is-separator s
```

Let $f, g : \cC(A,B)$, and suppose that $f \circ e = g \circ e$ for every $\cC(S,A)$.
We can then form the equaliser $(E,e)$ of $f$ and $g$. Note that if $e$
is invertible, then $f = g$, as $f \circ e = g \circ e$ holds by virtue of
$e$ being an equaliser.

```agda
equalisers+conservative→separator equalisers f∘-conservative {f = f} {g = g} p =
  invertible→epic equ-invertible f g Eq.equal
  where
    module Eq = Equaliser (equalisers f g)
```

Moreover, $\cC(S,-)$ is conservative, so it suffices to prove that

> precomposition of $e$ with an $S$-generalized element is an equalivalence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
precomposition of $e$ with an $S$-generalized element is an equivalence.
```

      is-iso→is-equiv $ iso
        (λ e → Eq.universal (p e))
        (λ e → Eq.factors)
        (λ h → sym (Eq.unique refl))
```

A similar line of argument lets us generalize this result to separating
families.

```agda
equalisers+jointly-conservative→separating-family
  : ∀ {κ} {Idx : Type κ} {sᵢ : Idx → Ob}
  → has-equalisers C
  → is-jointly-conservative (λ i → Hom-from C (sᵢ i))
  → is-separating-family sᵢ
```

<details>
<summary>The proof is more-or-less the same, so we omit the details.
</summary>
```agda
equalisers+jointly-conservative→separating-family
  equalisers fᵢ∘-conservative {f = f} {g = g} p =
  invertible→epic equ-invertible f g Eq.equal
  where
    module Eq = Equaliser (equalisers f g)

    equ-invertible : is-invertible Eq.equ
    equ-invertible =
      fᵢ∘-conservative λ i →
      is-equiv→is-invertible $
      is-iso→is-equiv $ iso
        (λ eᵢ → Eq.universal (p eᵢ))
        (λ eᵢ → Eq.factors)
        (λ h → sym (Eq.unique refl))
```
</details>

Our next result lets us relate separating objects and separating families.
Clearly, a separating object yields a separating family; when does the
converse hold? One possible scenario is when:

> 1. The separating family $S_i$ is indexed by a [[discrete]] type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

1. The separating family $S_i$ is indexed by a [[discrete]] type.
```

2. $\cC$ has $I$-indexed coproducts.

> 3. Every hom set $\cC(S_i, X)$ has a distinguished inhabitant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Every $\hom$-set $\cC(S_i, X)$ has a distinguished inhabitant.
```

        is-set→subst-refl
          (λ i → Hom (sᵢ i) x)
          (Discrete→is-set Idx-Discrete)
          i=i eᵢ
      ... | no ¬i=i = absurd (¬i=i refl)
```

In particular, if $\cC$ meets conditions (1) and (2) and has a [[zero object]],
then $\cC$ has a separating object.

```agda
  zero+separating-family→separator
    : Zero C
    → is-separating-family sᵢ
    → is-separator (ΣF sᵢ)
  zero+separating-family→separator z separates =
    hom-inhabited+separating-family→separator
      (λ _ _ → Zero.zero→ z)
      separates
```

# Dense separators

As noted in the previous sections, separating objects categorify
the idea that the behaviour of functions can be determined by their
action on $S$-generalized elements. However, note that a separating
object only lets us *equate* morphisms; ideally, we would be able to
construct a morphism $\cC(X,Y)$ by giving a function $\cC(S,X) \to \cC(S,Y)$
on $S$-generalized elements as well! This desire leads directly to the
notion of a **dense separating object**.

:::{.definition #dense-separating-object alias="dense-separator"}
An object $S : \cC$ **dense separating object** is a
**dense separating object** or **dense separator** if:

> - For all $X, Y : \cC$, a function $\eta : \cC(S,X) \to \cC(S,Y)$ induces

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- For all $X, Y : \cC$, a function $\eta : \cC(S,X) \to \cC(S,Y)$ induces
```

  : ∀ {s}
  → is-dense-separator s
  → ∀ (x : Ob)
  → is-indexed-coproduct C {Idx = Hom s x} (λ _ → s) (λ f → f)
dense-separator→coyoneda {s = s} dense x = is-copower where
  module dense = is-dense-separator dense
  open is-indexed-coproduct

  is-copower : is-indexed-coproduct C {Idx = Hom s x} (λ _ → s) (λ f → f)
  is-copower .match  = dense.universal
  is-copower .commute = dense.commute
  is-copower .unique h p = dense.unique _ p
```

The converse is also true: if every object $X$ is a copower $\cC(S,X) \otimes S$,
then $S$ is a dense separator.

```agda
coyoneda→dense-separator
  : ∀ {s}
  → (∀ (x : Ob) → is-indexed-coproduct C {Idx = Hom s x} (λ _ → s) (λ f → f))
  → is-dense-separator s
coyoneda→dense-separator {s} coyo = dense where
  module coyo (x : Ob) = is-indexed-coproduct (coyo x)
  open is-dense-separator

  dense : is-dense-separator s
  dense .universal = coyo.match _
  dense .commute = coyo.commute _
  dense .unique h p = coyo.unique _ _ p
```

## Dense separating families

Next, we extend the notion of a dense separator to a family of objects.

::: {.definition #dense-separating-family}
A family of objects $S_i : \cC$ is a **dense separating family** if:

> - functions $\eta : (i : I) \to \cC(S_i, X) \to \cC(S_i, y)$ with
>   $\eta i (f \circ g) = eta j f \circ g$ induce maps $u_{\eta} : \cC(X,Y)$; and
> - For every $e_i : \cC(S_i, X)$, $u_{\eta} \circ e_i = \eta i e_i$; and
> - The map $u_{f}$ is universal among all such maps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- functions $\eta : (i : I) \to \cC(S_i, X) \to \cC(S_i, y)$ with
  $\eta_i (f \circ g) = \eta_j f \circ g$ induce maps $u_{\eta} : \cC(X,Y)$; and
- For every $e_i : \cC(S_i, X)$, $u_{\eta} \circ e_i = \eta_i e_i$; and
- The map $u_{f}$ is universal among all such maps.
```

Unfortunately, we need to jump through some hoops to construct the
appropriate functor from the full subcategory generated
by $S_i$ into $[\cC, \Sets]$

```agda
  jointly-ff→dense-separating-family
    : is-jointly-fully-faithful (よcov C F∘ Functor.op (Forget-family {C = C} sᵢ))
    → is-dense-separating-family sᵢ
  jointly-ff→dense-separating-family joint-ff .universal eta p =
    equiv→inverse joint-ff λ where
      .η → eta
      .is-natural _ _ g → ext λ f → p f g
  jointly-ff→dense-separating-family joint-ff .commute {i = i} {eᵢ = eᵢ} =
    equiv→counit joint-ff _ ηₚ i $ₚ eᵢ
  jointly-ff→dense-separating-family joint-ff .unique h p =
    sym (equiv→unit joint-ff h) ∙ ap (equiv→inverse joint-ff) (ext p)

  dense-separating-family→jointly-ff
    : is-dense-separating-family sᵢ
    → is-jointly-fully-faithful (よcov C F∘ Functor.op (Forget-family {C = C} sᵢ))
  dense-separating-family→jointly-ff dense =
    is-iso→is-equiv $ iso
      (λ α → dense .universal (α .η) (λ f g → α .is-natural _ _ g $ₚ f))
      (λ α → ext λ i eᵢ → dense .commute)
      λ h → sym (dense .unique h λ i eᵢ → refl)
```

We can also express this universality using the language of colimits.

> In particular, if $S\_i : I \to \cC$ is a dense separating family,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, if $S_i : I \to \cC$ is a dense separating family,
```
